---
permalink: /cse-first-years
short: cse-first-years
title: Getting started as a CSE first year
time: 5 January 2023
layout: post
tags: cse-setup guide
desc: You've just received your offer to study a CSE degree at UNSW, and you're wondering what comes next. This guide will help you get started.
show-read-time: yes
---

Howdy! If you've discovered this article, chances are that you've received an offer to study in a CSE degree at UNSW. Congratulations! You're about to embark on an exciting journey, although getting started at uni can be a little overwhelming at first. This guide is here to hopefully help!

<details>
<summary>Okay, but why have you decided to put this guide together?</summary>
Hi! I'm Abiram, and I'm entering my 4th year of a Computer Science degree at UNSW. I've been involved in a variety of different things around the CSE community. A common complaint is that there's a lack of comprehensive information provided by the university to help first years get started. CSESoc (more on them soon!) usually puts out a guide every year to help fill this void, and I'll be referring to it quite heavily throughout this post. However, there's many areas that this guide doesn't cover, and I hope to fill in some of these gaps. I'll also be adding some of my own personal experiences and tips to help you get started.

(If some things here seem somewhat familiar from a Reddit post you've seen in the past, this is not the first time I've put information together).

As a disclaimer, I'm a student representative, have been involved with CSESoc (although not involved with the Content/Media side of things), have written activities for CSESoc's Lab 0 workshop, have also been heavily involved with the Security Society, and am a course administrator and tutor for COMP1521, one of the first year core courses - though none of my opinions here are representative of the university. Note that my society involvement may make me a bit biased, although where I only ever link to other resources if I personally think that they are brilliant.
</details>

## Table of contents

## I have never written a line of code in my life. Am I screwed?

## What the HECS?

IF you're a domestic student, you typically have the option to take on a HECS-HELP loan to pay for your tuition fees, rather than paying for them upfront. This is a loan that you pay back once you start earning a certain amount of money.

Considering that most university students do not typically have the means to pay upfront, this is a pretty good deal - you don't 'accrue interest' on this loan, but the loan is adjusted to account for inflation.

If you require HECS-HELP assistance, make sure to select this option when beginning your enrolment.

{: .alert .alert-red}
***Obligatory disclaimer**: I am not a financial advisor by any means - do your own research here.

You'll also see an option for SA-HELP - this is to cover the approximately $105 student services and amenities fee which you'll need to pay every trimester for which you're enrolled in courses, so typically thrice a year. If you have the means to cover this upfront, I'd recommend just clearing it off.

Speaking of the T word...

## Trimesters!

UNSW operates on a trimester system, meaning that you'll have three terms every year. Each term consists of weeks 1-10, although week 6 is considered 'flexibility week', with no classes, and no assignments due during the week [^1]. This means that there are 9 teaching weeks each term.

Terms are then followed with a few days of 'student vacation', designed to allow students to prepare for exams. This is followed by an approximately 2 week exam period, after which each term ends.

If you've browsed UNSW Discord servers, or the subreddit, you've probably seen some very mixed opinions on trimesters. From the student perspective, I think that they're *sufficiently* bearable that the benefits of UNSW CSE degrees outweigh the appeal of semesters at other universities.

[^1]: It is, however, extremely common for assignments to be due right after flexibility week.

## Degrees: CS vs SENG

Considering that you've likely received your offer already, this may feel a bit late, but you can always swtich

## CS majors

## Courses, degree planning and enrolment

### Structuring your year

### Core courses

### Electives

### Course codes

## Societies

### Discord servers

## Double degrees

## Internal program transfers

## What equipment is useful?

## Other bits of general advice